---
layout: post
lang: en
title: Voting
slug: voting
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2016-03-13 09:37
category: My bits and bytes
tags: Politics, Voting
featured_image: logos/germany.png
---
Many people are dissatisfied with the current situation. They feel that
politics favors rich people; that their lives get harder; that big companies
profit from political decisions.

Their reaction: Not voting / voting blank / voting invalid.

This is an awful idea because of the following reasons:

1. Blank votes and invalid votes are treated just the same way as not voting,
   although the number might get counted
   ([source](http://www.wahlrecht.de/lexikon/ungueltig.html)).
2. If you're not voting, the people who vote get more influence with their
   votes.
3. This means by not voting, you're effectively voting **for** the current
   situation.

What are your alternatives? Get active.

1. Have a closer look at the parties. On
   [wahl-o-mat.de](https://www.wahl-o-mat.de/) you can see 22&nbsp;parties with
   some elected positions. You don't have to agree 100% for all questions. You
   only have to find a party which is "good enough".
2. Speaking to parties and demanding certain positions. I guess all mayor
   parties are mainly doing what they think their segment of voters likes. If
   enough people demand a certain position, they might change.
3. Make your own party. This is always a possibility. Find other people who
   think the same way.

Not voting, blank voting and invalid voting is just stupid and lazy. It shows
your support of the current situation / the parties which are currently strong.
