---
layout: post
lang: en
title: The p value
slug: p-value
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2017-02-21 20:00
category: Mathematics
tags: mathematics, statistics
featured_image: logos/mathematics.png
---
The $p$ value is often used in applications to determine if some improvement
is *significant* or if it was just random chance. Loosely speaking, it defines
how likely it is (under the assumption of an hypothesis $H_0$) to get more
extreme results.

This is interesting for studies in medicine and similar scenarios. You have a
drug and a placebo. You want to figure out if the drug is better than the
placebo.


## Hypothesis testing

In statistics, hypothesis testing works as follows:

* **Define a statistical model**: This means you have a sample $\mathfrak{X}$ and
  an assumption about the distribution of the data. For example, $\mathfrak{X} = \mathbb{R}^n$ where $n \in \mathbb{N}$ is your sample size and $X_1, \dots, X_n \stackrel{iid}{\sim} \mathcal{N}(\mu, \sigma^2)$
* **Define a hypothesis and an alternative**: For example $H_0: \mu = 100$ and
  $H_1: \mu > 100$ might be hypotheses if you want to check if a drug increases
  the IQ.
* **Controll errors**: You can make two errors. Either $H_0$ is true and you
  reject it or $H_1$ is true, but you don't reject $H_0$. In statistics, the
  first error is usually controlled. So the test is made in such a way that
  the first error is less than some $\alpha \in (0, 1)$. Usually, $\alpha = 0.05$
  or $\alpha = 0.01$ or even lower.
* **Test statistic**: You have a value which indicates something about the parameters
  in the hypotheses. For example $T(X_1, \dots, X_n) = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1} X_i$.
* **Test statistic distribution**: $T$ itself is a random variable and you can calculate its distribution
  (e.g. $T \stackrel{H_0}{\sim} \mathcal{N}(\mu, \frac{\sigma^2}{n})$).
* **Calculate test decision**: Hence you can calculate a $c \in \mathbb{R}$ such that
  $P_{H_0}(H_0 \text{ is rejected}) = P_{H_0}(T \leq c) \leq \alpha$.
  It does not have to be $T < c$, but often it is.

## The p value

Now note that you could also make it the other way round. You could calculate

$$p^* = P_{H_0} (T(X) \geq T(x))$$

If $p^* \leq \alpha$, then $H_0$ can be rejected on Niveau $\alpha$.


## Interesting statements

I just came across the following statments which I think are interesting enough
to share them. **All of them are wrong.**

The follwing was takine from a German statistics exam by Dr. Klar (KIT, WS 2013/2014).

Assume for the following, that an experiment resulted in a $p$ value of $0.01$.

1. $H_0$ is certainly false.
2. $H_0$ is with probability $0.01$ false.
3. $H_1$ is certainly correct.
4. You can calculate the probability that $H_1$ is correct with the $p$ value.
5. If one decides to reject $H_0$, then the $p$ value is the probability of
   making the wrong decision.
6. The experimental result is reliable, meaning that if the experiment is
   repeated often one would get a significant result in 99% of the cases.

I'm not too sure if (5) is really wrong.


## p hacking

<iframe width="512" height="288" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/42QuXLucH3Q?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## See also

* [The p-Value You Can’t Buy](http://amstat.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00031305.2015.1069760)
