---
layout: post
lang: en
title: Scrum
slug: scrum
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2017-08-30 20:00
category: Code
tags: design process
featured_image: logos/star.png
---
Scrum is a design process. In contrast to the [waterfall model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model)
it is agile. Other agile design processes are Extreme programming (XP) and
[Kanban](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanban_(development)).


## Process

<ol>
    <li>Product owner writes a product backlog</li>
    <li>Sprint
        <ol>
            <li>Decide which user stories to work on</li>
            <li>Assign points to user stories</li>
            <li>Work on them (build, test, review)</li>
        </ol>
    </li>
    <li>Go back to 2.</li>
</ol>

<dl>
    <dt>Sprint</dt>
    <dd>1-3 weeks; plan, build, test and review one feature set. The outcome
        is a potentially shippable product.</dd>
</dl>


## Roles

* **Product owner**: Responsible for defining the features of the product
* **Scrum master**: Team leader; protects the team and makes sure the process
  is done as it should be.
* **Team**: Creates the product

## Artifacts

<dl>
    <dt>Product Backlog</dt>
    <dd>Prioritized set of features that could go into the product. Each
        element is called a user story and gets written by the product
        owner.</dd>
    <dt>User Story</dt>
    <dd>A way of describing a feature set. It is written in the following format
        <code>As a [role] I need [feature] so that [I can do ...].</code>
    </dd>
    <dt>Sprint Backlog</dt>
    <dd>Subset of the product backlog that gets handled in the current sprint.
        Each user storys work gets estimated in points.</dd>
</dl>


## Meetings

<dl>
    <dt>Sprint planning</dt>
    <dd>PO, Scrum Master and Team meet to discuss the user stories and how much work they are.</dd>
    <dt>Daily Scrum</dt>
    <dd>Each team member says (1) What did I do yesterday? (2) What do I plan to do today? (3) Where am I blocked / need help?</dd>
    <dt>Sprint Review</dt>
    <dd>At the end of the sprint. See what was done / what should be done.</dd>
    <dt>Sprint Retrospective</dt>
    <dd>What could be better next time?</dd>
</dl>


## See also

* Uzility: [Introduction to Scrum - 7 Minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9TycLR0TqFA)
