---
layout: post
lang: en
title: MP3 Player
slug: mp3-player
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2017-01-02 20:00
category: Cyberculture
tags: Design, Device, MP3
featured_image: logos/design.png
---
I thought MP3 players were basically a solved problem, meaning they are only
improved in price, storage capacity and battery.

However, there are some design flaws with a new MP3 player I recently got. In
this post I just want to collect some design ideas which I think are important.

Physical features:

* Dedicated volume button (up and down)
* On-off switch which does not easily get pushed by accident (e.g. a switch, not a button)
* A single "start / stop" button
* Navigation buttons: up / down / select (select can be the same button as "play / stop", but then there has to be a way to get out of the menu fast and easy)
* Illuminated display which is big enough to show battery, current title,
  playback time. No need to be able to play videos.
* Standard plug for headphones.
* Standard Smartphone USB slot (micro-b?) for charging and transfering data.
* microSD card slot which accepts at least 32GB cards.

Software features:

* When the MP3 player is shut down while playing an MP3, it should save where
  it was and play it from this point (or rather 5 seconds earlier) when it is
  turned on again.
* Playlists
    * Have a simple, open, standard format for playlists. For example <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M3U">M3U</a> or better <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_Shareable_Playlist_Format">XSPF</a>
    * Play playlist files.
    * Create a playlist from a folder.
    * Possibility to remove a song from a playlist
    * Possibility to add a song to a playlist
    * Possibility to move the position of a song in a playlist
* Act as a simple USB stick when connected to a computer. No special file
  system should be necessary.

It would be nice if the MP3 player supported USB&nbsp;3, but I don't think that
is necessary.
