---
layout: post
title: Werewolf Winning Probabilities
slug: werewolf
author: Martin Thoma
status: draft
date: 2020-01-19 20:00
category: My bits and bytes
tags: Game
featured_image: logos/star.png
---
Werewolf is a game for a group of at least 4 people. You have at least one
werewolf and several villagers. The werewolves try to kill the villagers and
the villagers try to kill the werewolf. It is round-based and the villagers
don't know who the werewolves are.

In the villagers round (the day), everybody tries to figure out who one
werewolf is. The villagers and the werewolfs then vote whom to kill. Imagine a
lyniching mob. They might accidentially hit a villager, too.

At night, the werewolfs kill one villager. As they know each other, they are
guaranteed to hit a villager.

Besides mistakes from the werewolves, this is a game of chance. In the
following, $p_v$ is the probability of villagers to win, $p_w$ is the
probability of werewolves to win, $p_d$ is the probability of no winner.


## One Werewolf, no special roles

If there is only one werewolf and one villager left, the werewolf is guaranteed
to win: 1 werewolf, 1 villager $\Rightarrow p_w = 1$ and $p_v = 0$.

If there are two villagers, they basically choose at random. Hence they have
1/3 chance to directly win. If they kill a villager, we are in the situation
from above. This means: 1 werewolf, 2 villagers $\Rightarrow p_w = 2/3$ and $p_v = 1/3$.

In general, you can say that the probability that one werewolf wins, given that $n$
villagers are left $p_w^{(n)}$, is:

$$p_w^{(n)} = (1 - \frac{1}{i + 1}) \cdot p_w^{(n-1)}$$
