---
layout: post
title: Nexus 4
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2013-03-10 12:52:06.000000000 +01:00
categories:
- Cyberculture
tags:
- Review
- smartphone
- Android
- Nexus 4
featured_image: 2013/03/nexus-4-motorola-w156.jpg
---
<h2>Buying it</h2>
You can buy a Nexus 4 in <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturn_(store)">Saturn</a>, but the 16GB-version costs 395 Euro there (<a href="http://www.saturn.de/mcs/product/LG-Nexus-4-16-GB,48352,365082,523287.html?langId=-3">source</a>). In Google Play Store, it costs "only" 349 Euro (<a href="https://play.google.com/store/devices/details/Nexus_4_16GB?id=nexus_4_16gb">source</a>).

<h3>Comdirect</h3>
So, I've decided to buy it from Google Play Store. But you have to have a <a href="http://www.google.de/wallet/">Google Wallet</a> account to use it. For a Google Wallet account, you need a credit card. Unlike in the USA, most people in Germany don't have a credit card. I had to get one and decided to use the free one from <a href="http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comdirect">Comdirect</a>.

Here is a list of letters I got... I've expected one or two.

<dl>
  <dt>08.02.2013</dt>
    <dd>I sent my information for registration to comdirect</dd>
  <dt>15.02.2013</dt>
    <dd>Notice that I need to send a <a href="http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meldebest%C3%A4tigung">Meldebest&auml;tigung</a> as I did identity verification with my <a href="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Biometrie_reisepass_deutsch.jpg">passport</a> and not with my <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_identity_card">identity card</a>. The Meldebest&auml;tigung costs 8.00 Euro.</dd>
  <dt>21.02.2013</dt>
    <dd>General information like account number</dd>
  <dt>22.02.2013</dt>
    <dd>PIN for online login</dd>
  <dt>28.02.2013</dt>
    <dd>Visa-Card</dd>
  <dt>27.02.2013</dt>
    <dd><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_authentication_number">iTAN</a> list</dd>
  <dt>04.03.2013</dt>
    <dd>.comdirect girocard</dd>
  <dt>05.03.2013</dt>
    <dd>re-activation of bank account</dd>
  <dt>05.03.2013</dt>
    <dd>bank account blocked: three failed online logins</dd>
  <dt>05.03.2013</dt>
    <dd>PIN for <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Girocard">Girocard</a></dd>
</dl>

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="290" caption="Three cards I got from one bank" url="../images/2013/03/comdirect-karten-irrsinn.jpg" alt="Three cards I got from one bank"  height="300" class="size-medium wp-image-60371" %}

At 28.02.2013, I first transferred 5 Euro to check if everything works as expected. I have to transfer it to my girocard. It arrived at 01.03.2013. Then I have to transfer it to my Visa card. It arrived at 04.03.2013. Quite a long time for an internal transaction.

As I made three attempts to login into my online account from comdirect bank, my account was locked. I had to send a fax and ask them to unlock my account! Another Euro for the fax. (By the way, I think this is a security leak. If I wanted to do harm to the bank, I could make lots of accesses to their customers accounts and lock them. I guess it wouldn't take me more than 30 minutes to write the code and about one day to let it run. Very bad.)

<h3>Google Play</h3>
Ok, I've got a credit card. Now I will have bought a Nexus 4 in a couple of minutes, right? Wrong.

{% gallery size="medium" columns="2" %}
    ../images/2013/03/google-mail-from-play-2013-03-06-1047.png "Google Mail from Google Play from 2013-03-06, 10:47"
    ../images/2013/03/invalid-adress-help.png   "Invalid address: Google help"
    ../images/2013/03/invalid-address.png   "Google Play Store: Invalid address bug"
{% endgallery %}

What the hell? They think I live in Helgoland or have military address?

Ok, let's try it again:

{% gallery size="medium" columns="2" %}
    ../images/2013/03/google-wallet-2013-03-06.png  "Google Wallet 2013-03-06"
    ../images/2013/03/google-wallet-2013-03-06-1055.png "Google Wallet 2013-03-06, 10:55"
{% endgallery %}

WTF? Although the transaction was canceled, my bank thinks it happened. I can't see the transaction in my bank account, though. According to my online bank account, I haven't reached my limit. But I cannot pay for the "second" phone. That sucks.

The next day it worked:

{% gallery size="medium" columns="2" %}
    ../images/2013/03/play-store-versanddatum.png   "Google Play Store"
    ../images/2013/03/google-play-store-2013-03-06-1046.png "Google Play Store 2013-03-06, 10:46"
    ../images/2013/03/google-play-store-2013-03-07.png  "Google Play Store, 2013-03-07"
{% endgallery %}

2013-03-07: Now I have to wait for the phone.

2013-03-08: Hurray, it's here!

My old not-so-smart phone and my new Nexus 4:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Nexus 4 and Motorola W156" url="../images/2013/03/nexus-4-motorola.jpg" alt="Nexus 4 and Motorola W156"  height="298" class="size-medium wp-image-60091" %}

<h2>Micro-SIM vs. Mini-SIM</h2>
Did you know that different SIM cards exist? I didn't. I've learned that I have a Mini-SIM, but you need a Micro-SIM for the Nexus 4.

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="GSM SIM card evolution (<a href='http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:GSM_SIM_card_evolution.svg'>source</a>)" url="../images/2013/03/gsm-sim-card-evolution-300x93.png" alt="GSM SIM card evolution"  height="93" class="size-medium wp-image-60011" %}

I use a pre-paid card from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simyo">simyo</a>. Currently, they offer a free exchange of Mini-SIM-cards to Micro-SIM or Nano-SIM:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Simyo: Free Micro-SIM" url="../images/2013/03/simyo-2013-03-08-1912-300x217.png" alt="Simyo: Free Micro-SIM"  height="217" class="size-medium wp-image-60021" %}

Phew! I was lucky.

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Simyo Kombi SIM (Mini and Micro SIM)" url="../images/2013/03/simyo-sim-karte.jpg" alt="Simyo Kombi SIM (Mini and Micro SIM)"  height="192" class="size-medium wp-image-61041" %}

The Micro-SIM-card arrived at 2013-03-14 and will be unlocked the next day.


<h2>Beginners questions</h2>
<div class="question">
<span class="question">What do those small icons on the top mean?</span>
<div class="answer">
Those icons are the notifications. Hold your finger on the top bar and pull down. Now you can view / clear them.
</div>
</div>

<div class="question">
<span class="question">How can I close apps?</span>
<div class="answer">See <a href="http://www.technipages.com/galaxy-nexus-how-to-close-apps.html">this answer</a>.</div>
</div>

<div class="question">
<span class="question">How do I remove widgets?</span>
<div class="answer">
<ol>
  <li>Go to your home screen</li>
  <li>Leave your finger on the widget for three seconds</li>
  <li>Move your finger to the appearing "remove"</li>
</ol>
</div>
</div>

<div class="question">
<span class="question">How do I open a shell?</span>
<div class="answer">
Install <a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=jackpal.androidterm">Android Terminal Emulator</a>.
(It says quite often "Permission denied")
</div>
</div>

<div class="question">
<span class="question">How can I execute Python?</span>
<div class="answer">
Install <a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.hipipal.qpyplus">QPython+ (Android Python)</a>.
(WARNING: This seems to be a beta.)
</div>
</div>

<div class="question">
<span class="question">How can I take screenshots on my Nexus 4?</span>
<div class="answer">
Press "Volume down" and "Power" at the same time:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="How to take a screenshot with Nexus 4" url="../images/2013/03/how-to-take-screenshot-nexus-4.jpg" alt="How to take a screenshot with Nexus 4"  height="288" class="size-medium wp-image-60181" %}
</div>
</div>

<div class="question">
<span class="question">How can I enable Geolocations for my photos?</span>
<div class="answer">
{% gallery size="medium" %}
    ../images/2013/03/camera-settings.png   "Camera settings"
    ../images/2013/03/Screenshot_2013-03-09-11-01-11.png    "Android: Store location setting"
{% endgallery %}
</div>
</div>

<h2>Experiments with Nexus 4</h2>
<h3>Photo-Sphere</h3>
You can create <a href="http://www.androidcentral.com/check-out-these-awesome-photo-sphere">awesome photos</a> with photo sphere. But objects have to be not very close.

Here is my first try with my room:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="A sphere photo of my room" url="../images/2013/03/my-room-2013-03-08.jpg" alt="A sphere photo of my room" height="150" class="size-medium" %}

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Karlsruhe Panorama, 2013-03-09 09:30" url="../images/2013/03/Karlsruhe-Panorama_2013-03-09_0930.jpg" alt="Karlsruhe Panorama, 2013-03-09 09:30"  height="118" class="size-medium" %}

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Karlsruhe (Panorama) 2013-03-09 09:51" url="../images/2013/03/Karlsruhe-Panorama_2013-03-09_0951.jpg" alt="Karlsruhe (Panorama) 2013-03-09 09:51"  height="121" class="size-medium" %}

[sphere 60431]

At the moment, it is not simply possible to include a sphere into a WordPress blog. <a href="https://github.com/kennydude/photosphere">Code</a> was published to create this effect and <a href="http://kennydude.github.com/photosphere/test.html">it works</a>, but <a href="http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/wp-photo-sphere/">the WordPress plugin</a> has <a href="http://wordpress.org/support/plugin/wp-photo-sphere">some issues</a>.

By the way, you can directly create a tiny world image from a photo sphere:
{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Karlsruhe - Tiny World" url="../images/2013/03/karlsruhe-tiny-world.jpg" alt="Karlsruhe - Tiny World"  height="300" class="size-medium" %}

<h3>Adding a nicer alarm</h3>
One reason why I bought this phone was that my alarm clock (which is my old phone) is awful. <a href="http://www.zedge.net/ringtones/6067/google-nexus-4-ringtones/0-6-1/">zedge.net</a> seems to be one place where you can get ring tones. I like <a href="http://goo.gl/8c36v">Sintels song</a>, which was in Google Music.

I've installed <a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.angryredplanet.android.rings_extended">Rings Extended</a>, as I wasn't able to find the ringtone without it. That could be better.

<h3>Sky Map</h3>
As my phone as quite a lot of sensors (GPS, compass, altimeter) I guessed it might be possible to store the well-known stars and show them on the device when you look in their direction. The app is calles "<a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.stardroid&hl=en">Sky Map</a>". I have to try that when the sky is clear.

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="300" caption="Android Sky Map" url="../images/2013/03/android-sky-map-300x180.png" alt="Android Sky Map"  height="180" class="size-medium wp-image-60261" %}

<h3>Movies</h3>
I was very surprised that they don't have <a href="../blender-open-movies/">Blender Open Movies</a> in the movie section of play store ☹

<h3>MyTracks</h3>
MyTracks lets you record the track you take and see some stats about that. Quite nice, but the export doesn't work.

I filed my first bug / feature request for an app: <a href="https://code.google.com/p/mytracks/issues/detail?id=1260">Issue 1260</a>

<h2>What it replaces</h2>

Nexus 4 could replace quite a lot of stuff:
{% caption align="aligncenter" width="295" caption="What Nexus 4 could replace" url="../images/2013/03/what-nexus-4-could-replace.jpg" alt="What Nexus 4 could replace"  height="300" class="size-medium" %}

But it can't replace credit cards in Germany as NFC isn't supported by the shops by now. It can't really replace a camera as the quality is ugly. Just take a close look at the photo above. This was taken with Nexus 4. Sadly, if you don't install apps like <a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sand.airdroid">AirDroid</a>, it can't replace a USB stick or a MP3 player. Yes, you can use Google Music and that works, but I would like to be able to copy MP3s from my laptop computer to my smartphone. Directly. With a USB-cable and without having to use the internet.
It does replace a notepad, if you only use it for writing texts and not for drawing or math.
And, finally, at the moment it doesn't even replace my old phone because of the SIM-problem I've explained above.
But as soon as this is fixed, the Nexus 4 will replace my Motorola W156.

Here is a comparision of those phones:
<table>
 <thead>
  <th>&nbsp;</th>
  <th>Nexus 4</th>
  <th>Motorola W156</th>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>Display</td>
  <td>4.7 in (120 mm) diagonal IPS<br/>1280&times;768 px (316 ppi)</td>
  <td>1.6 in (40 mm) diagonal<br/>128&times;128 pixel</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Colors</td>
  <td>16 777 216</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Memory</td>
  <td>16 GB</td>
  <td>20 kb (<a href="http://motorolafans.cz/en/phones/motorola-w156.php">source</a>)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Body</td>
  <td>133.9 x 68.7 x 9.1 mm</td>
  <td>114 x 43 x 14 mm</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Weight</td>
  <td>139 g</td>
  <td>85 g</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Stand-by time</td>
  <td>390 hours</td>
  <td>465 hours</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Battery</td>
  <td>2100 mAh (Li - Polymer)</td>
  <td>940 mAh (Li - Ion)</td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>

Here is the <a href="http://www.phonearena.com/phones/compare/Motorola-W156,Google-Nexus-4/phones/2435,7531">source</a> for that comparison.

What it hopefully really replaces are maps. I've just downloaded maps for the center of Paris. That were only about 2 MB. Here is a screenshot of maps guidance in action:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="180" caption="Google Maps on Nexus 4 in action" url="../images/2013/03/google-maps-on-nexus-4-in-action-180x300.png" alt="Google Maps on Nexus 4 in action"  height="300" class="size-medium wp-image-60561" %}

## Mounting as USB-Stick ##
This is a mayor drawback of the Nexus 4. You can't simply plug it in
and work with it like you do with a USB-Stick. You have to enter

```bash
mkdir Android
go-mtpfs Android
[do what you want]
sudo umount Android
```

<h2>Conclusion</h2>
I finally paid 358,99 Euro for the phone and shipping, 8 Euro for the "Meldebest&auml;tigung" and 1 Euro for the fax to re-activate my bank account which is 367,99 Euro in total. But if you want to experiment with a high quality smart phone, I guess it's a good choice.

<h2>What's next?</h2>
I have some ideas for apps. So my next steps are:

<ol>
  <li>Kick Windows 7 and <a href="https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Installation_Guide">install Arch Linux</a> as the implementation / QA for PSE is over</li>
  <li><a href="http://developer.android.com/training/index.html">Start developing apps</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://developer.android.com/distribute/googleplay/publish/register.html">Get Started with Publishing</a></li>
</ol>

I guess I'll also write an article what could get improved in Android.
