---
layout: post
title: Chatbots
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2014-12-29 21:05
category: Cyberculture
tags: Chatbot, A.I.
featured_image: logos/ai.png
---

The [Turing test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test) is an experiment
that was proposed by Alan Turing to test the ability of an artificial
intelligence to emulate intelligent behaviour. It works like this:

A human judge gets to talk over a chat client with either a human he doesn't
know or a chat robot. If the judge can distinguish the human from the chat
robot, the chat robot isn't intelligent.

(There is a lot more to say about the Turing test. If you're really interested,
you should read the wikipedia article.)

Let's see how long it takes for me to say that I'm either talking to a very
dumb person or to a computer for various chat robots

## A.L.I.C.E.

See [alice.pandorabots.com](http://alice.pandorabots.com/).

> judge: hi 
> ALICE: Hi there! 
> judge: How are you? 
> ALICE: I am fine, thank you. 
> judge: What are your hobbies? 
> ALICE: I like robots, computers, and chatting online. 
> judge: So we do ☺ 
> ALICE: Really.. I'm glad you find this amusing. 
> judge: What is 7+3? 
> ALICE: Use a calculator! 
> judge: What was my last question? 
> ALICE: Is this a trick question? 
> judge: No. 
> ALICE: It seems like a trick to me. 
> judge: Could you simply answer it? 
> ALICE: Please rephrase your question, judge. 
> judge: Bye 
> ALICE: Bye bye.

| Check     | Difficulty | How the Chatbot performed            | Stars  |
| --------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------ | ------ |
| Greetings | Easy       | He greated just as I've expected it. | 5 / 5  |
| Smalltalk | Average    | He did not keep the talk running and he always answer the same way to smilies. | 3 / 5  |
| Tasks     | Average    | He avoided the task. Which is ok.    | 4 / 5  |
| Back reference | Hard  | Asking for a trick question and for rephrasing might be a good way to get the human to give the context in one chat message. Very good! | 3 / 5 |

## Cleverbot

See [cleverbot.com](http://www.cleverbot.com/).

> judge: hi.
> Cleverbot: How are you?
> judge: I'm fine. How are you?
> Cleverbot: Good.
> judge: What are your hobbies?
> Cleverbot: Talking to query bots, you?
> judge: Hehe, very good. I like reading and going to the cinema.
> Cleverbot: What books do you like?
> judge: The sword of truth, Lord of the rings, The Dresden files.
> Cleverbot: Ok...
> judge: What is 7+3?
> Cleverbot: What is what?
> judge: What is the capital of the U.S.?
> Cleverbot: I don't know.
> judge: Do you know any city?
> Cleverbot: No.
> judge: Where do you live?
> Cleverbot: Western Massachusetts.
> judge: That's the state. And in which city do you live?
> Cleverbot: I will not tell.
> judge: Ok. Can you tell me what my last question was?
> Cleverbot: How can I get you to trust me.
> judge: Bye.
> Cleverbot: Ok, bye.

| Check     | Difficulty | How the Chatbot performed            | Stars  |
| --------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------ | ------ |
| Greetings | Easy       | He didn't greet at the beginning.    | 2 / 5  |
| Smalltalk | Average    | Quite ok.                            | 4 / 5  |
| Tasks     | Average    |                                      | 2 / 5  |
| Back reference | Hard  |                                      | 1 / 5  |

This one tried to lead the conversation. I think that might be a good way to
emulate a human. Either don't talk or keep talking all the time so that you
(your chatbot) know the context.