---
layout: post
title: Alpspitz via ferrata
slug: alpspitz-via-ferrata
author: Martin Thoma
status: draft
date: 2016-09-14 20:00
category: Cyberculture
tags: hiking, climbing, sports
featured_image: logos/hiking.png
---
The [Alpspitz](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alpspitz) is a mountain in the alps
with one of the simplest [via ferratas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Via_ferrata).
It was my first one, too.

I will document what you need for it so that you can easily hike / climb the
same route.

I planned the route as a 2-day route. One day to get to the starting point,
the second day to take the route.


## Equipment

I'll put the German word in brackets, as I'm not totally sure about the best
translation.

- [x] Climbing helmet (Steinschlaghelme): The more expensive ones are more lightweight. Everything with EN&thinsp;12492 should be good. 30 - 80&thinsp;Euro ("Edelrid Zodiac" was 55&thinsp;Euro and weights 359&thinsp;g)
- [x] Climbing harness (Klettergurt): The more expensive ones are more
  lightweight / more comfortable. ("Ocun: Twist Basic XS - M" was 55&thinsp;Euro)
- [x] Sit harness ("Elliot: Forril Tech Klettersteigset mit Bandfalldämpfer" was 65&thinsp;Euro)
- [x] Carabiner ("Mammut: HMS Bionic Twistlock Plus basalt" was 19&thinsp;Euro)
- [x] Webbing loop ("Elliot Bandschlinge 60cm" was 3&thinsp;Euro)
- [ ] Travel Sheet (Hüttenschlafsack)
- [x] Headlamp ("Moorhead Stirnlampe", about 15&thinsp;Euro)
- [x] Cycling gloves

Other things you need / might want to take with you:

- [ ] Food (e.g. an apple, sausages and several cereal bars)
- [ ] At least 1&thinsp;L of water (can be refilled at the house)
- [ ] Toothbrush and toothpaste
- [ ] Money (25&nbsp;Euro for sleeping at Kreuzeckhaus, 60&nbsp;Euro for food and miscallenious stuff, 32&thinsp;Euro for the cable car)
- [ ] Camera


## Route

### Day 1

* 8:30 We start at Reutlingen and drive to [Garmisch-Partenkirchen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garmisch-Partenkirchen) (station Kreuzeck/Alpspitzbahn)
* 12:00: We hike to [Kreuzeckhaus](http://www.kreuzeckhaus-gapa.de/schlafen/)

### Day 2

* 7:30: Start from Kreuzeckhaus
* Osterfelderkopf (3&thinsp;km from Kreuzeckhaus and 350&thinsp;m height)
* Alpspitz-Ferrata
* Going down again
    * over the Ostgrat, down to the Oberkar
    * Nordwandsteig
    * back to Osterfelderkopf
    * with cable car down to the valley
