---
layout: post
title: Publications in Science
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2014-11-22 17:19
categories:
- Cyberculture
tags:
- Rating
- Science
- Publication
- Authorship
featured_image: logos/science.png
---
<div class="info">I have a bachelors degree in computer science and I'm currently studying for a masters degree in computer science. This means I have some knowledge about research. But I haven't worked as a reviewer or at a journal. I have tried to publish a paper at a conference (<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Conference_on_Document_Analysis_and_Recognition">ICDAR</a>), but it got rejected. So please take everything I write in this article with a grain of salt.</div>

Peer-reviewed publications are one important corner stone of science. As a
researcher who begins to study a new topic, you will first try to get to the
current state of the art by looking for papers about the topic. They are also
important for settling minor questions. When there is a paper published in a
peer-reviewed journal about the question you were thinking of (and you're not
willing to make your own experiments) that can be a way to quickly make a
statement.

Papers are a shortcut to cutting-edge knowledge.

But shortcuts are not always good. You have to be able to trust your source if
you don't want to make the experiments yourself. I've recently read a blog
article where it was (once again) shown that you can't trust every journal,
even if they claim they are "peer-reviewed".


## Why are papers written?

It takes very long to write a paper. They have to be consistent with
themselves, make a non-trivial statement, show methods used to support the
statment, point out similar research which is done in this area and why it is
not the same as what is examined / claimed in the paper. They contain the
interesting results a researcher got in a very condensed format. For example,
I wrote my bachelors thesis about a symbol recognition system I've created
(<a href="http://write-math.com">write-math.com</a>). The more or less complete
description of all experiments I did as well as a detailed description of the
methods I used has 92&nbsp;pages. The paper I wrote only had 5&nbsp;pages
(see [martin-thoma.com/write-math](//martin-thoma.com/write-math/) for
the thesis, the paper and other material). Even after I shortened the
bachelor's thesis to 5&nbsp;pages, I had to adjust the language. That took me
at least 20&nbsp;hours.

So why might it be worth the effort?

A paper is the way to communicate research to other researchers. It shows very
briefly what the author was working on. It might introduce new results, a new
method, confirm known results by using already know methods in a new way. But I
guess the important point is that it is short and of highest quality.
Trustworthy.

If researchers had enough time, money and expertise they should be able to
do the same experiments again and confirm the results themselves. But those
resources are scarce, so trustworthy publications are important. This is where
historically peer-reviews and peer-reviewed journals got really important.


## What is a peer review?

A "peer" is somebody who is at a level equal.<small><sup><a href="#ref1" name="anchor1">[1]</a></sup></small> So a peer review is a review done by somebody who works in the same
field. This can be done for many reasons:

1. Prevent spam submissions
2. Prevent articles with "obviously" wrong content being accepted
3. Prevent articles of inferior quality being accepted
4. Help authors to improve their quality
    * by finding missing experiments which should be done to support the claim
      of the paper,
    * by checking the paper for consistency with itself and probably with other
      papers in the same field,
    * by finding typos
5. Increase trust in the paper and the journal

This means if a journal has a working peer-review system, and if the peers who
review do their work properly, you can be relatively confident that the claims
are correct. You don't need to check it yourself, because others have done so
for you. But you have to be able to trust the journal that they really made
a peer review. You have to trust them, that they have reliable reviewers and
that they are able to decide who has knowledge in a given topic.


## Exposed unrealiable journals

A paper with the title
"[Fuzzy, Homogeneous Configurations](https://cdn2.vox-cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/2522068/manuscript_Networking_Simpson.0.pdf)"
and the authors Margaret Simpson, Kim Jong Fun and Edna Krabappel was submitted
to the Journal of Computational Intelligence and Electronic Systems and the
Aperito Journal of Nanoscience Technology. The author generated the paper with
[SCIgen](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/archive/scigen/), an automatic CS paper
generator.<small><sup><a href="#ref2"
name="anchor2">[2]</a></sup></small><small><sup><a href="#ref3"
name="anchor3">[3]</a></sup></small>

The same thing happened with a paper generated by
[Mathgen](http://thatsmathematics.com/mathgen/). This paper was generated by
"Professor Marcie Rathke" from the non-existing "University of Southern North Dakota at Hoople".
It was submitted to [Advances in Pure Mathematics](http://www.scirp.org/journal/apm/) (Scientific Research Publishing) and seemd to be accepted.<small><sup><a href="#ref4" name="anchor4">[4]</a></sup></small>
According to the blog, the journal wanted 500.00 US-Dollar to print the
article. This was not paid and for this reason the paper was not printed in
the journal.


## What can currently be done against it?

As an author who put many hours in the research itself and again many hours in
writing the paper, you don't want to publish it to such unreliable,
unprofessional journals. As the author should have domain knowledge, he should
know which journals are important, which ones are trustworthy. So publishing
in such a journal makes the author itself untrustworthy.


### Open Science

I think journals are (partially) a relict from the past. Before the internet,
researchers needed journals to pubish their work to have any impact at all.
Today, researchers can publish their work on platforms like the
[arXiv](http://arxiv.org/). This gives everybody free access to the work. Or
researchers can publish it directly via their universitys services / websites
(as I did with the KIT system EVA STAR).


### Current quality measures

Don't get me wrong: Good, peer-reviewed journals are still interesting. A paper
will still get much more attention if it was published in one of the big
journals (like [IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_Transactions_on_Pattern_Analysis_and_Machine_Intelligence)). But if
you look at Wikipedias [List of scientific journals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_scientific_journals), you will quickly figure out that there are LOTS
of journals.

One way to separate the wheat from the chaff are automatically applyable
quality measures. One such measure is the [impact factor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impact_factor).
The <abbr title="impact factor">IF</abbr> is calculated on a annual basis:

$$IF(year, journal) = \frac{A(year, journal)}{B(year, journal)}$$

where $A$ is the numer of times all items of the journal from $year-1$ and
$year-2$ before were cited by publications in $year$.
$B$ is the number of "citable items" published by the journal in $year-1$ and
$year-2$.

However, there is a lot to criticize about the IF:

* It doesn't give a simple, black-and-white reliable/not reliable way to look
  at journals for authors.
* Depending on how much effort you want to put into it, you can manipulate the
  score by adding many new papers which cite themselves.
* Even considering only "nice" authors / journals who don't want to actively
  influence the quality measure, you have different numbers of citations from
  field to field.
* Citations might not always be positive.

See [criticisms section](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impact_factor#Criticisms)
in the Wikipedia article for more information.


## What could be done against it?

The problem of trust does still exist. In some sense it is more complicated
today than it has ever been. In the "traditional" way of publishing a paper at
a conference or journal, researchers only had to figure out what conference or
journal is trustworthy. From "a few" journals and conferences, I guess. (Please
leave a comment if you know how many journals and confereces excisted over the
time - I guess there is at least a linear growth because publishing becomes
easier, but I would like to see number for that).

Today, you have to do so on a paper basis if you want to consider openly
published papers. You could also try to figure out which of the thousands of
journals is trustworthy, but as some might actively try to influence the
quality measures without actually having high quality, we need new ways to
look at this problem.


### Publishing Hoax Papers
I'm not too sure what I think about this approach. On the one hand, it can
settly the argument if you can trust a journal at all. If they accept an
obvious hoax paper, they don't have a reviewing process. However, humans have
to have a look at the hoax paper. So this is a waste of valuable human
resources.


### Computer-verifiable papers
Computers can verify proofs automatically. This is called [automated proof checking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_proof_checking). It would be awesome if the proof checkers
would be sophisticated enough to make the required time to annotate a proof
for automated checkers acceptable. Currently, I am pretty sure this approach
has several problems:

1. There is no way of annotating the proof (e.g. by adding meta-data to the
   TeX-files or to the PDF) in such a way that a pogram can figure out what
   is to be proven and which steps were taken in the proof.
2. There is no knowledge-base of statements which are already proven, already
   in common knowledge of every mathematician so that computers can use them,
   too.
3. It would be necessary to check if the textual goal of the proof is
   consistant with the metadata goal of the proof. For example, the annotation
   could state that 1=1 is to be proven, but the text says P=NP is to be
   proven.
4. Similar to 3, but not as severe: It would be nice if the text steps of a
   proof are consistant with the annotation. This would prevent that a valid
   statement, which is annotated with enough information to proof it
   automatically is described a wrong way.

Automatic provers like [KeY](http://www.key-project.org/) do already exist.
This means there already is a way to describe a proof goal as well as the
necessary knowledge to infer the goal from axioms. I know that [JML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Modeling_Language) can be used to specify a program. KeY can then
(sometimes) (half-)automatically find a proof that the program follows the
specification. However, this is very difficult. I would say currently not
feasible for any non-trivial program.

I should also note that this might be possible for mathematics and eventually
some branches of computer science, but I doubt that this would be
applicable to physics, chemistry or biology. Not to mention other subjects
like medicine.


### Annotating trustworthiness in references

I think it would be nice if authors would annotate the references they give in
PDFs with "trustworthiness". This means one could cite negative sources,
sources where results could be proven to be wrong (or at least not confirmed).


### Identity of authors

Is an author important for a paper? I'm not too sure about this one. But at
least the author on the paper should be the real author. So I shouldn't be able
to publish something as somebody else. As names might also collide, I would
suggest that author names should be skipped. Instead, a checkable identifier
should be taken.

For example, email addresses would be such identifiers. You can check if
somebody is the owner of an email address by sending him or her a confirmation
email. The nice thing about it would be that the author would also give a way
to contact him this way.

However, email addresses are also not optimal as they might change. One could
also set up a web service with the aim to provide identifiers. This service
could give email addresses which are guaranteed not to be given to any other
person. Ever. Such identifiers should have a minimum distance to prevent typos
from giving false authorship, a checksum to make checking for typos easy and
an the web service should have an
<abbr title="application programming interface">API</abbr> to check if it is
really used by somebody.

[ResearcherID](http://www.researcherid.com/) and
[ORCiD](http://about.orcid.org/) are two services which want to give IDs to
researchers. For example, my ORCiD is
[0000-0002-6517-1690](http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6517-1690). However, those IDs
seem to be very rarely used. I've never seen them in citations. How can one be
sure that a publication was really made by me, if it doesn't contain the ID?
(TODO: I've contacted ORCiD to see if they have any plans regarding those
problems.)


## References
<ol>
  <li><a name="ref1" href="#anchor1">&uarr;</a>: <a href="https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/peer#Noun">peer</a>. Wiktionary.</li>
  <li><a name="ref2" href="#anchor2">&uarr;</a>: Fiona MacDonald: <a href="http://www.sciencealert.com/two-scientific-journals-have-accepted-a-study-by-maggie-simpson-and-edna-krabappel">A study by Maggie Simpson and Edna Krabappel has been accepted by two scientific journals</a>, 10.12.2014. sciencealert.com.</li>
  <li><a name="ref3" href="#anchor3">&uarr;</a>: Rachel Feltman: <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/speaking-of-science/wp/2014/12/08/two-scientific-journals-accepted-a-study-by-maggie-simpson-and-edna-krabappel/">Two scientific journals accepted a study by Maggie Simpson and Edna Krabappel</a>, 08.12.2014. washingtonpost.com.</li>
  <li><a name="ref4" href="#anchor4">&uarr;</a>: <a href="http://thatsmathematics.com/blog/archives/102">Mathgen paper accepted!</a>, 14.09.2012. thatsmathematics.com.</li>
</ol>


## See also
* [A Cautionary Tale about Predatory Publishers](http://library-blog.syr.edu/drs/2014/09/03/a-cautionary-tale-about-predatory-publishers/)
