---
layout: post
title: 3D Photospheres
author: Martin Thoma
date: 2014-11-22 17:19
categories:
- Cyberculture
tags:
- 3D
- photographs
- Kickstarter
- Virtual Reality
featured_image: logos/optonaut.png
---
I've been to New York City a few months ago. It was an interesting experience.
Everything is so big, it is difficult to get a feeling for it if you haven't
seen it yourself. For example, the [WTC Memorial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_September_11_Memorial_%26_Museum) is overwhelmingly large. I tried
to capture that in a photograph with my Panasonic DMC-TZ41, but it just doesn't
look that large:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="500" alt="WTC Memorial" text="WTC Memorial" url="../images/2015/05/NYC-Memorial-Pool-1.jpg" %}

A photosphere captures that much better (it looks great on my Smartphone, but
not nearly as well on the web): [Android Photosphere](http://martin-thoma.com/html5/photosphere-wtc-memorial)

Optonaut goes one step further. This app is able to create 3D photospheres.


## How it works - User perspective

You start the app, slowly turn around yourself to capture everything around
you. This includes your feet and the sky, if you really want a complete
photosphere. The recording process the same as for Android Photospheres, but
probably with a slightly different interface:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="500" alt="Optograph recording process" text="Optograph recording process" url="../images/2015/05/optonaut-recording-process.gif" %}

When you want to watch it in 3D you have to have something that holds it in
front of your face at the right distance. Cardboard is an easy and cheap
possibility to do so:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="500" alt="Cardboard" text="Cardboard" url="../images/2015/05/optonaut-cardboard.jpg" %}


And, of course, you can already share optographs:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="500" alt="Sharing Optographs" text="Sharing Optographs" url="../images/2015/05/sharing-optographs.jpg" %}

## How it works - Developers perspective

Optonaut makes use of the camera and takes a lot of images. Those images are
combined to a photosphere by a process called
[image stitching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_stitching). This means
you search points which seem to match to build one big image from many small
images. A big problem is that your camera moves quite a lot in space and the
environment changes. So there might not be any way to make a perfect match.
Sensors like the compass and the
[accelerometer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accelerometer) help to figure out
at which direction you are currently pointing. Programs like
[hugin](http://hugin.sourceforge.net/) stitch images semi-automatically, but
Optonaut works completely automatically.


From my experience with Android Photospheres, this works much better when the
objects around you are far away. That means it doesn't work in your room.

Then Optonaut uses a technique called
[stereoscopy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stereoscopy). They show you
different images for each eye to give you the impression of a 3D image. As they
can figure out where you look at with the accelerometer / compass, they adjust
the images accordingly:

{% caption align="aligncenter" width="500" alt="Stereographic images produced by Optonaut" text="Stereographic images produced by Optonaut" url="../images/2015/05/optograph.gif" %}

The 3D photosphere is stored as an archive of images.


## The Optonaut Team

Optonaut has two founders: Emanuel Jöbstl and Johannes Schickling. I've
had the luck to work with them in my first hackathon (CODEFEST8). We won in
Karlsruhe with an App / web service with a fully automatic drivers logbook
([logbookapp.de](http://logbookapp.de/)). Both of them are great developers.
Emanuel created the (working!) Android app which connected to the car within a
couple of hours and Johannes made a beatiful frontend in the same time.

Emanuel knows a lot about protocols, can understand mathematically complex
algorithms and solve conceptually difficult problems. I guess he wrote the
stitching algorithm.

I've learned a lot from Johannes about tools. He is a perfectionist. In
situations where most people would say "hey, it works, lets drink some coffee"
he is still working hard to get the best user experience, making the code
more maintainable by refactoring it, improving the way how code is built /
deployed. In a short-term project this costs probably more time than doing it
quick-and-dirty, but on the medium/long run (e.g. more than 2 weeks) it saves
a lot of work.

And Optonaut is such a long-term project. They are working on it for quite a
while now, so I am sure the quality is pretty high. I am very curious if the
[Kickstarter campaign](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/optonaut/optonaut-virtual-reality-photography) works as well as they hope and I cannot wait for the first people to share their
optographs from amazing places!


## Future of Optonaut

The Optonaut team plans to build a sharing site where you can show others
amazing places. They want to completely redesign the App.

I guess the stitching algorithm is something where you can put endless effort
in. It is an optimization problem where it is not completely clear what to
optimize, so I guess this will continually be improved.


## I want it! What do I need?

You need an Android / iOS smartphone. There seems to be a web-based viewer
which works with Chrome/Firefox/Safari, too.


## See also

* [Optonaut.com](http://optonaut.com/): The official website
* [Kickstarter](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/optonaut/optonaut-virtual-reality-photography): Support them, get early access / the App and your own Cardboard